-> The client is connected to server via sockets.

-> The number of sockets depends upon the number of clients that we have

-> No. of sockets on the server side depends on the No. of clients that we have.

Who is responsible to create the sockets?

The server socket is responsible to create the sockets for the client.

Everytime the client sends the request to the server, server creates a server socket inside the server

What do we need to connect with the server?

We require two things to connect with the server

1. IP address (Every machine will have a unique IP address)
2. Port Number (To know on which port the application should run)

Application              Port Number
Tomcat                      8080
My Sql                      3306
Skype                       8000

Socket Client:

Port Number: In your server, multiple processes will be running in order to target a particular process, port number is used.

The port numbers range from 0 to 65535
Reserved port numbers: 0-1023

Once the connection is established with the server, communication happens and the data transfer as well.


The socket will have input port and output port. When the data is sent, it has to be sent to the output port of the socket.

The data has to be converted to stream format.

OutputStreamWriter, PrintWriter are the two methods that can be used to send the data.

Socket Server:

1. Create the server socket object.
2. Pass in the client side port number into it.
3. There are chances that the input port number may be busy so we have to handle the exceptions.

4. Whenever the client sends a request a server socket has to be created.


How do my server know that the request is being sent?

If the server socket is accepting any request, it will create a socket object.

As soon as the request is received from the client a new socket is created.

Once the request is made from the client side, we need to fetch the data.

How to fetch the data?

The data can be fetched by using the buffered reader.

Buffered reader is used to read the data from a socket.

In buffered reader we need to pass the object of the input stream reader.

Inside the input stream reader we need to pass the socket input stream.

By using br.readline() method we can get the data.

Buffered reader method is used and the data is accepted using the input stream reader


How to establish a two way communication?







